Course introduction (#2)
csc-training/Kielipankki: slides/intro.md

---
theme: csc-2019
lang: en
pagetitle: Introduction
---

# Kielipankki & CSC {.title}

Corpora, language technology, computational linguistics, corpus linguistics, supercomputers and all that

<div class="column">
![](https://mirrors.creativecommons.org/presskit/buttons/88x31/png/by-sa.png)
</div>
<div class="column">
<!-- <small> -->
<!-- All materials (c) 2023 by CSC – IT Center for Science Ltd. -->
<!-- This work is licensed under a **Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike** 4.0 -->
<!-- Unported License, [http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) -->
<!-- </small> -->
</div>

# Kielipankki <img src="img/kielipankki_logo.png" style="display:inline-block;position:absolute;top:-20px;">

## AKA The Language Bank of Finland

* We create, solicit and receive corpora

* We enrich the corpora with NLP tools

* We make available our enriching tools, plus others

> * Hundreds of corpora, tens of billions of words

Reviewer: If I didn't know better, just reading this would make me think that we only hoard corpora but don't provide access to anything besides tools. Unless soliciting can be offering in non-sexwork contexts too, but I suppose not?

Might be good to make the providing side clear too.

Author: Added an extra bullet for that

# What can we do with language?

## Computational linguistics
<img src="img/shift_reduce.gif"><img src="img/lexc.png"><img src="img/praat_sound_file.png" style="width:25%">

<!-- Image credits? http://www.ling.helsinki.fi/~klinden/pubs/sfcm09hfst.pdf https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S000437021830540X https://joeystanley.com/blog/a-tutorial-on-extracting-formants-in-praat -->

* Linguistics from a computer science perspective: formalisms, parsing, rule-writing

* We have and use tools for this

* We will not focus on this in this course

# What can we do with language?

## Language technology

* Same thing but in the 90's-2000's <div class="column"><img src="img/like_cluster_for_liikenne.png"></div>

* More application-oriented and uses statistics

* More computation

* We have an bonus problem set on topic modeling in this course

# What can we do with language?

## Corpus linguistics

* Statistics on a body of text <div class="column"><img src="img/lemmarank.png"></div>

* Can use tool-generated information: morphology, syntax, semantics etc.

* Arguably Kielipankki's main focus, we will do a project in this course

# What can we do with language?

> ## Modern large-scale machine learning
> 
> * This is what you read about in the headlines <div class="column" style="width:30%"><img src="img/shoggoth.jpeg"></div>
> 
> * Generic statistical approaches, no linguistic content
> 
> * Huge amounts of data and computation, cutting-edge applications
> 
> * A lot of this goes on at CSC, but we won't do it in this course

Reviewer: The text might be a bit hard to read for participants with smaller screens, especially if zoom shows them the video bar in the same window. We could do something like this to make the image a bit bigger and thus easier to read:
```suggestion
<div class="column" style="width:58%">
## Modern large-scale machine learning

* This is what you read about in the headlines

* Generic statistical approaches, no linguistic content

* Huge amounts of data and computation, cutting-edge applications

* A lot of this goes on at CSC, but we won't do it in this course
</div>
<div class="column" style="width:40%"><img src="img/shoggoth.jpeg" style="width:100%;height:auto"></div>
```

NB: the sum of the column widths cannot be 100% because both columns want 1% padding

Author: Yeah, this is probably better. I made the Shoggoth a little smaller for this to give it a bit more space.

# Kielipankki resources: Korp

> * A browser for corpora <div class="column" style="width:50%"><img src="img/korp_screenshot.png"></div>

Reviewer: This slide could be a bit more balanced if it had two columns somewhat like the eldritch LLM suggestion has. If reading the text is not required, this is just an aesthetic bonus though, not a requirement.

Author: Yeah, it's better.

* Developed by Språkbanken (our Swedish sister organisation)

* Advanced search features, supports some statistics views

# Kielipankki resources: Corpora

* Many modalities (text, speech, video, structured, scanned pages)

* Some available on Korp, some as downloads, some as both

* From completely open to very restricted

* Text usually annotated with metadata, part of speech, base form, morphology, dependency syntax

* We can also annotate named entities, sentiment, geospatial information etc.

# Kielipankki resources: Tools

* <a href="https://www.kielipankki.fi/tools/">https://www.kielipankki.fi/tools/</a>

* Hosted tools: run on our machines, interact via the web (eg. WebAnno for manually annotating text)

> * Downloadable tools: tools maintained by us for that you can run on your own machine (eg. `finnish-tagtools`)

Reviewer: "for that" doesn't sound right here?

Author: D'oh

* Software installed on our HPC platforms, need to log in there to use them

# CSC resources: Data storage

* HPC has a lot of capacity for temporary data

* IDA, long-term storage for FAIR research data is hosted at CSC

* Users have access to:
    * an object storage system (Allas)
	* a hosted database service (Kaivos)
	* encrypted data storage via SD desktop

# CSC resources: Cloud computing

* Virtual servers (Pouta), you can host long-running services and websites here

* Container cloud (Rahti), same but with containers

* Notebooks, an instant programming environment

# CSC resources: HPC (High-Performance Computing)

* Access usually via a command line, or a browser-based app

* **Puhti** -- General purpose. 682 CPU nodes, each with 40 cores + 80 Nvidia GPU nodes - we'll be using this through Jupyter in the browser!

* **Mahti** -- Larger-scale jobs. 1404 CPU nodes, each with 128 cores, 180K CPU cores total! 24 GPU nodes, but very beefy ones (4 Nvidia A100's).

> * **Lumi** -- GPU-specialised jobs. Over 10K AMD GPUs. That's a lot of compute (#3 in the world!).

Reviewer: Isn't Lumi going to have a number of partitions for different needs, only some of which have GPUs? Not that the GPU wouldn't be the impressive part, so if emphasis on it makes sense for the talk, it's okay to keep this as is.

Author: Yeah, true, but keeping it simple with this.
